LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The revolutions of 1848 , also known as the springtime of the peoples , were a series of revolutions throughout Europe that spanned almost two years, between January 1848 and October 1849. They remain the most widespread revolutionary wave in European history to date.

The revolutions varied widely in their aims but generally opposed conservative systems, such as absolute monarchy and feudalism , and sought to establish nation states , founded on constitutionalism and popular sovereignty . The revolutionary wave began with the revolution in Sicily in January and spread across Europe after the revolution in France in February 1848. Over fifty countries were affected, but with no significant coordination or cooperation among their respective revolutionaries. Some of the major political contributing factors were widespread dissatisfaction with political leadership, demands for more participation in government and democracy, for freedom of the press , and by the working class for economic rights, and the rise of nationalism . Other economic factors, such as the European potato failure , triggered mass starvation, migration, and civil unrest.

The uprisings were led by temporary coalitions of workers and reformers, including figures from the middle and upper classes (the bourgeoisie ); however, these coalitions did not hold together for long. Many of the revolutions were quickly suppressed, as tens of thousands of people were killed, and even more were forced into exile. Despite this, significant lasting reforms included the abolition of serfdom in Austria and Hungary, the end of absolute monarchy in Denmark, and the introduction of representative democracy in the Netherlands. The revolutions were most prominent in France, Italy , the Austrian Empire , and the states of the German Confederation that would make up the German Empire in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The wave of uprisings ended in October 1849.


INFOBOX
=======
Revolutions of 1848
Part of the
Age of Revolution
Barricade
on the rue Soufflot
,
an 1848 painting by
Horace Vernet
depicting the
June Days uprising
. A
red flag
, symbol of the workers, is visible in opposition to the
tricolour
of the
French Second Republic
.
Date
12 January 1848 – 4 October 1849
Location
Europe
Also known as
Springtime of the peoples
Participants
People and governments of
France
, the
German Confederation
, the
Austrian Empire
,
Italian states
,
Denmark
,
Ireland
,
Moldavia
,
Wallachia
,
Greater Poland
, and others
Outcome
See
Events by country or region
Political change in a few countries
Significant social and cultural change