LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Iranian Revolution , also known as the Islamic Revolution , culminated in the overthrow of the Pahlavi dynasty in 1979. The revolution led to the replacement of the Imperial State of Iran by the Islamic Republic of Iran , as the monarchical government of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was superseded by Ruhollah Khomeini , an Islamist cleric who had headed one of the rebel factions. The ousting of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the last Shah of Iran , formally marked the end of Iran's historical monarchy .

In 1953, the CIA - and MI6 -backed 1953 Iranian coup d'état overthrew Iran's prime minister, Mohammad Mossadegh , who had nationalized the Anglo-Persian Oil Company . The coup reinstated Mohammad Reza Pahlavi as an absolute monarch and significantly increased the level of influence of the United States over Iran.

In 1963, the Shah had launched the White Revolution , a top-down modernization and land reform program that alienated many sectors of society, especially the clergy. Khomeini emerged as a vocal critic and was exiled in 1964. However, as ideological tensions persisted between Pahlavi and Khomeini, anti-government demonstrations began in October 1977, developing into a campaign of civil resistance that included communists , socialists , and Islamists . Mass protests were underway. A key turning point occurred in August 1978, when the Cinema Rex fire by Islamic militants killed around 400 people. However a large portion of the public believed it was a false flag operation by SAVAK , the Shah's secret police , to discredit the opposition and justify a crackdown, fueling nationwide outrage and mobilization. By the end of 1978, the revolution had become a broad-based uprising that paralyzed the country for the remainder of that year.

On 16 January 1979, Pahlavi left Iran for exile, leaving his duties to Iran's Regency Council and Shapour Bakhtiar , the opposition-based prime minister. On 1 February 1979, Khomeini returned , following an invitation by the government; several million greeted him as he landed in Tehran . By 11 February, the monarchy was brought down and Khomeini assumed leadership while guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed Pahlavi loyalists in armed combat. Following the March 1979 Islamic Republic referendum , in which 98% approved the shift to an Islamic republic , the new government began drafting the present-day constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran ; Khomeini emerged as the supreme leader of Iran in December 1979.

The revolution was fueled by widespread perceptions of the Shah's regime as corrupt, repressive, and overly reliant on foreign powers, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom, at the expense of Iran's sovereignty and cultural identity. However others perceived the revolution's success as unusual, since it lacked customary causes of revolutionary sentiment, e.g. defeat in war, financial crisis, peasant rebellion , or disgruntled military. It occurred in a country experiencing relative prosperity, produced profound change at great speed, and resulted in a massive exile that characterizes a large portion of Iranian diaspora , and replaced a pro-Western secular and authoritarian monarchy with an anti-Western Islamic republic based on the concept of Velâyat-e Faqih ( Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist ), straddling between authoritarianism and totalitarianism . In addition to declaring the destruction of Israel as a core objective, post-revolutionary Iran aimed to undermine the influence of Sunni leaders in the region by supporting Shi'ite political ascendancy and exporting Khomeinist doctrines abroad. In the aftermath of the revolution , Iran began to back Shia militancy across the region to expand its influence in the Arab world , seeking to establish an Iranian-led Shia political order in the Middle East.


INFOBOX
=======
Iranian Revolution
Mass demonstrations of people protesting against
the Shah
and the
Pahlavi government
on the day of
Ashura
on 11 December 1978 at College Bridge,
Tehran
Date
7 January 1978
(
1978-01-07
)
– 11 February 1979
(
1979-02-11
)
(1 year, 1 month and 4 days)
Location
Imperial State of Iran
Caused by
Discontent with
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi
's rule
Repression and torture of dissidents
Exile of Ruhollah Khomeini
(
Shia Islamist
faction)
and others
Goals
Overthrow of the
Pahlavi dynasty
Methods
Demonstrations
Strikes
Civil resistance
Riots
Rebellion
Armed street fighting
Resulted in
Revolutionaries' victory
Parties
Imperial State of Iran
Royalist groups
Regency Council
Rastakhiz Party
(until 1 November 1978)
Imperial Army
Imperial Guard
SAVAK
Shahrbani
Gendarmerie
Revolutionary Council
Other opposition
Confederation of Iranian Students
Islamist opposition
Combatant Clergy Association
Islamic Association of Students
Freedom Movement of Iran
Islamic Association of Teachers
Islamic Association of Engineers
Islamic Association of Physicians
Islamic Coalition Societies
Fada'iyan-e Islam
Mojahedin
Communist and socialist opposition
Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan
JAMA
National Front
Mojahedin-e-Khalq
Fadaiyan-e-Khalq
Tudeh Party
Sarbedaran
Peykar
Movement of Militant Muslims
Razmandegan
Worker's Way
Lead figures
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi
Jamshid Amouzegar
Jafar Sharif-Emami
Gholam Reza Azhari
Shapour Bakhtiar
Nematollah Nassiri
Nasser Moghaddam
Abbas Gharabaghi
Gholam Ali Oveissi
Ruhollah Khomeini
Mehdi Bazargan
Morteza Motahhari
Mohammad Beheshti
Mahmoud Taleghani
Casualties and losses
See
Casualties of the Iranian Revolution
^
Regency Council was practically dissolved on 22 January 1979, when its head resigned to meet
Ruhollah Khomeini
.
^
Imperial Iranian Army revoked their allegiance to the throne and declared
neutrality
on 11 February 1979.