LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
A microwave oven , or simply microwave , is an electric oven that heats and cooks food by exposing it to electromagnetic radiation in the microwave frequency range. This induces polar molecules in the food to rotate and produce thermal energy (heat) in a process known as dielectric heating . Microwave ovens heat food quickly and efficiently because the heating effect is fairly uniform in the outer 25–38 mm (1–1.5 inches) of a homogeneous , high-water-content food item.

The development of the cavity magnetron in the United Kingdom made possible the production of electromagnetic waves of a small enough wavelength ( microwaves ) to efficiently heat up water molecules. American electrical engineer Percy Spencer is generally credited with developing and patenting the world's first commercial microwave oven, the "Radarange", which was first sold in 1947. He based it on British radar technology which had been developed before and during World War II .

Raytheon later licensed its patents for a home-use microwave oven that was first sold by Tappan in 1956, but it was still too large and expensive for general home use. Sharp Corporation introduced the first microwave oven with a turntable between 1964 and 1966. The countertop microwave oven was introduced in 1967 by the Amana Corporation . After microwave ovens became affordable for residential use in the late 1970s, their use spread into commercial and residential kitchens around the world, and prices fell rapidly during the 1980s. In addition to cooking food, microwave ovens are used for heating in many industrial processes.

Microwave ovens are a common kitchen appliance and are popular for reheating previously cooked foods and cooking a variety of foods. They rapidly heat foods which can easily burn or turn lumpy if cooked in conventional pans, such as butter, fats, chocolate, or porridge . Microwave ovens usually do not directly brown or caramelize food, since they rarely attain the necessary temperature to produce Maillard reactions . Exceptions occur in cases where the oven is used to heat frying-oil and other oily items (such as bacon), which attain far higher temperatures than that of boiling water.

Microwave ovens have a limited role in professional cooking, because the boiling-range temperatures of a microwave oven do not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying, browning, or baking at a higher temperature produces. However, there are hybrid appliances that combine infrared radiation, hot air, and microwaves, such as convection microwave ovens.


INFOBOX
=======
Microwave oven
A modern microwave oven (2022)
Type
Appliance
Inventor
Percy Spencer
Inception
1947
; 79 years ago
(
1947
)
Manufacturer
Various
Available
Globally