LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Mexican–American War , also known in the United States as the Mexican War and in Mexico as the United States intervention in Mexico , (April 25, 1846 – February 2, 1848) was an invasion of Mexico by the United States . It followed the 1845 American annexation of Texas , which Mexico still considered its territory because it refused to recognize the Treaties of Velasco , signed by President Antonio López de Santa Anna after he was captured by the Texian Army during the 1836 Texas Revolution . The Republic of Texas was de facto an independent country, but most of its Anglo-American citizens who had moved from the United States to Texas after 1822 wanted to be annexed by the United States.

Sectional politics over slavery in the United States had previously prevented annexation because Texas would have been admitted as a slave state, upsetting the balance of power between Northern free states and Southern slave states. In the 1844 United States presidential election , Democrat James K. Polk was elected on a platform of expanding U.S. territory to Oregon , California (also Mexican territory), and Texas by any means, with the 1845 annexation of Texas furthering that goal. However, the boundary between Texas and Mexico was disputed, with the Republic of Texas and the U.S. asserting it to be the Rio Grande and Mexico claiming it to be the more northerly Nueces River . Polk sent a diplomatic mission to Mexico in an attempt to buy the disputed territory, together with California and everything in between for $25 million (equivalent to $798 million in 2024), an offer the Mexican government refused. Polk then sent a group of 80 soldiers across the disputed territory to the Rio Grande, ignoring Mexican demands to withdraw. Mexican forces interpreted this as an attack and repelled the U.S. forces on April 25, 1846, a move that Polk used to convince the Congress of the United States to declare war.

Beyond the disputed area of Texas, U.S. forces quickly occupied the regional capital of Santa Fe de Nuevo México along the upper Rio Grande. U.S. forces also moved against the province of Alta California and then turned south. The Pacific Squadron of the U.S. Navy blockaded the Pacific coast in the lower Baja California Territory . The U.S. Army, under Major General Winfield Scott , invaded the Mexican heartland via an amphibious landing at the port of Veracruz on March 9 and captured the capital, Mexico City , in September 1847. Although Mexico was defeated on the battlefield, negotiating peace was politically complex. Some Mexican factions refused to consider any recognition of its loss of territory. Although Polk formally relieved his peace envoy, Nicholas Trist , of his post as negotiator, Trist ignored the order and successfully concluded the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo . It ended the war, and Mexico recognized the cession of present-day Texas, California, Nevada, and Utah as well as parts of present-day Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming. The U.S. agreed to pay $15 million (equivalent to $479 million in 2024) for the physical damage of the war and assumed $3.25 million of debt already owed by the Mexican government to U.S. citizens. Mexico relinquished its claims on Texas and accepted the Rio Grande as its northern border with the United States.

The victory and territorial expansion Polk had spearheaded inspired patriotism among some sections of the United States, but the war and treaty drew fierce criticism for the casualties, monetary cost, and heavy-handedness. The question of how to treat the new acquisitions intensified the debate over slavery in the United States. Although the Wilmot Proviso explicitly forbade the extension of slavery into conquered Mexican territory, it was not adopted by Congress, and debates about it heightened sectional tensions. Some scholars see the Mexican–American War as leading to the American Civil War . Many officers who had trained at West Point gained experience in the war and later played prominent leadership roles during the Civil War. In Mexico, the war worsened domestic political turmoil and led to a loss of national prestige, as it suffered large losses of life in both its military and civilian population, had its financial foundations undermined, and lost more than half of its territory.


INFOBOX
=======
Mexican–American War
Part of the
Manifest destiny
Clockwise from top:
Winfield Scott
entering
Plaza de la Constitución
after the
Fall of Mexico City
, U.S. soldiers engaging the retreating Mexican force during the
Battle of Resaca de la Palma
, U.S. victory
at Churubusco
outside of Mexico City, Marines
storming Chapultepec castle
under a large U.S. flag,
Battle of Cerro Gordo
Date
April 25, 1846 – February 2, 1848
(
1846-04-25
–
1848-02-02
)
(1 year, 9 months, 1 week and 1 day)
Location
Texas
,
New Mexico
,
California
; Northern, Central, and Eastern Mexico;
Mexico City
Result
American victory
Territorial
changes
Mexican Cession
Mexico cedes to the U.S. present-day California, Texas, New Mexico,
Utah
,
Nevada
, and
Arizona
, and parts of
Colorado
,
Oklahoma
,
Kansas
, and
Wyoming
, for $15 million
Belligerents
United States
California
Mexico
Commanders and leaders
List
James Polk
George Dallas
William Marcy
Winfield Scott
George Bancroft
Robert Stockton
John Wool
John Fremont
John Sloat
John Mason
Zachary Taylor
William Hardee
(
POW
)
Jacob Brown
(
DOW
)
Earl Van Dorn
Archibald Gillespie
Benjamin Wilson
William Mervine
Stephen Kearny
Philip Cooke
Alexander Doniphan
Sterling Price
(
WIA
)
Ceran St. Vrain
John Burgwin
†
Henry Clay Jr.
†
Richard Weightman
John Adams
David Twiggs
William Harney
James Shields
(
WIA
)
William Worth
Thomas Childs
Joseph Lane
Henry Burton
Henry Naglee
David Conner
Matthew Perry
Elie Vallette
Thomas Selfridge
Tunis Craven
Charles Heywood
William Shubrick
French Forrest
/
William Ide
List
Santa Anna
Mariano Paredes
Manuel Peña
Mariano Arista
Pedro Ampudia
Nicolás Bravo
José Herrera
Pedro Anaya
Joaquín Rea
Gabriel Valencia
†
José de Urrea
Juan Almonte
Anastasio Torrejón
Francisco Mejía
José Flores
Andrés Pico
José del Lugo
José Carrillo
Manuel Armijo
Pablo Montoya
Diego Archuleta
Pablo Montoya
†
Tomás Romero
†
Manuel Lombardini
(
WIA
)
Agustín Huarte
John Riley
Antonio León
†
Nicolás Bravo
Felipe Xicoténcatl
†
Joaquín Rea
Celedonio Jarauta
Manuel Muñoz
José Mijares
Martín de Cos
Strength
78,718
82,000
Casualties and losses
Total: 18,130
1,733 killed
4,152 wounded
11,550 dead from disease
695 missing
Total: 35,000
5,000 killed
20,000 wounded
10,000 missing
Including civilians killed by violence, military deaths from disease and accidental deaths, the Mexican death toll may have reached 25,000
and the American death toll reached 13,283.