LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Cuban Missile Crisis , also known as the October Crisis in Cuba ( Spanish : Crisis de Octubre ), or the Caribbean Crisis ( Russian : Карибский кризис , romanized : Karibskiy krizis ), was a 13-day confrontation between the governments of the United States and the Soviet Union , when American deployments of nuclear missiles in the United Kingdom , Italy and Turkey were matched by Soviet deployments of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The crisis lasted from 16 to 28 October 1962. The confrontation is widely considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into full-scale nuclear war .

In 1959, the US government deployed Thor nuclear missiles in England , an initiative known as Project Emily . In 1961 the US put Jupiter nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey . All were within range of Moscow . The US had also trained a paramilitary force of Cuban expatriates , for a CIA -led attempt to invade Cuba and overthrow its government in April 1961. Starting in November of that year, the US government engaged in a violent campaign of terrorism and sabotage in Cuba, referred to as the Cuban Project , which continued throughout the first half of the 1960s. The Soviet administration was concerned about a Cuban drift towards China , with which the Soviets had an increasingly strained relationship. In response to these factors the Soviet and Cuban governments agreed, at a meeting between leaders Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in July 1962, to place nuclear missiles on Cuba to deter a future US invasion. Construction of launch facilities started shortly thereafter.

A U-2 spy plane captured photographic evidence of medium- and long-range launch facilities in October. US president John F. Kennedy convened a meeting of the National Security Council and other key advisers, forming the Executive Committee of the National Security Council (EXCOMM). Kennedy was advised to carry out an air strike on Cuban soil in order to compromise Soviet missile supplies, followed by an invasion of the Cuban mainland. He chose a less aggressive course in order to avoid a declaration of war. On 22 October, Kennedy ordered a naval blockade to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba. He referred to the blockade as a "quarantine", not as a blockade, so the US could avoid the formal implications of a state of war.

An agreement was eventually reached between Kennedy and Khrushchev. The Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a US public declaration and agreement not to invade Cuba again. The United States secretly agreed to dismantle all of the offensive weapons it had deployed to Turkey. All Thors in the UK were disbanded by August 1963.  While the Soviets dismantled their missiles, some Soviet bombers remained in Cuba, and the United States kept the naval quarantine in place until 20 November 1962. The blockade was formally ended on 20 November after all offensive missiles and bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba. The evident necessity of a quick and direct communication line between the two powers resulted in the Moscow–Washington hotline . A series of agreements later reduced US–Soviet tensions for several years.

The compromise embarrassed Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of US missiles from Italy and Turkey was a secret deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev, and the Soviets were seen as retreating from a situation that they had started. Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of the Soviet Politburo 's embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the US and his ineptitude in precipitating the crisis. According to the Soviet ambassador to the United States , Anatoly Dobrynin , the top Soviet leadership took the Cuban outcome as "a blow to its prestige bordering on humiliation".


INFOBOX
=======
Cuban Missile Crisis
Part of the
Cold War
and the
aftermath of the Cuban Revolution
Left to right, top to bottom
A US
Jupiter
medium-range ballistic missile
(MRBM)
Soviet
R-12
MRBMs in
Moscow
The US presents evidence of R-12s in Cuba to the
United Nations Security Council
R-12 launch site in Cuba
Soviet
surface-to-air missile
site in Cuba
US
U-2
spyplanes, flown and shot down during the crisis
US
F-102s
in Alaska, scrambled with nuclear
air-to-air missiles
Soviet submarine B-59
surfaces after almost firing its
nuclear torpedo
on the US blockade
Date
16–28 October 1962
(naval blockade of Cuba ended on 20 November)
Location
Cuba
Result
Conflict resolved diplomatically
Publicized removal of Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba
Non-publicized removal of American nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy
Agreement with the Soviet Union that the United States would never invade Cuba without direct provocation
Creation of a
nuclear hotline
between the United States and the Soviet Union
Parties involved in the crisis
Soviet Union
Cuba
United States
United Kingdom
Italy
Turkey
Commanders and leaders
Nikita Khrushchev
Anastas Mikoyan
Rodion Malinovsky
Matvei Zakharov
Sergey Biryuzov
Issa Pliyev
Giorgi Abashvili
Fidel Castro
Raúl Castro
Che Guevara
John F. Kennedy
Robert McNamara
Maxwell D. Taylor
Curtis LeMay
George W. Anderson
Robert F. Kennedy
Harold Macmillan
Peter Thorneycroft
Sir Thomas Pike
Amintore Fanfani
Giulio Andreotti
Cemal Gürsel
İlhami Sancar
Strength
43,000 soldiers
100,000–180,000 (estimated)
Casualties and losses
None
1
U-2
spy aircraft lost
1 US pilot killed