LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Inca Empire , officially known as the Realm of the Four Parts ( Quechua : Tawantinsuyu pronounced [taˈwantiŋ ˈsuju] , lit. ' land of four parts ' ), was the largest empire in pre-Columbian America . The administrative, political, and military center of the empire was in the city of Cusco . The Inca civilisation rose from the Peruvian highlands sometime in the early 13th century . The Portuguese explorer Aleixo Garcia was the first European to reach the Inca Empire in 1524. Later, in 1532, the Spanish began the conquest of the Inca Empire, and by 1572 the last Inca state was fully conquered.

From 1438 to 1533, the Incas incorporated a large portion of western South America , centered on the Andean Mountains, using conquest and peaceful assimilation, among other methods. At its largest, the empire joined modern-day Peru with what are now western Ecuador , western and south-central Bolivia , northwest Argentina , the southwesternmost tip of Colombia and a large portion of modern-day Chile , forming a state comparable to the historical empires of Eurasia . Its official language was Quechua .

The Inca Empire was unique in that it lacked many of the features associated with civilization in the Old World . The anthropologist Gordon McEwan wrote that the Incas were able to construct "one of the greatest imperial states in human history" without the use of the wheel, draft animals, knowledge of iron or steel, or even a system of writing. Notable features of the Inca Empire included its monumental architecture , especially stonework, extensive road network ( Qhapaq Ñan ) reaching all corners of the empire, finely-woven textiles , use of knotted strings ( quipu or khipu ) for record keeping and communication, agricultural innovations and production in a difficult environment, and the organization and management fostered or imposed on its people and their labor.

The Inca Empire functioned largely without money and without markets. Instead, exchange of goods and services was based on reciprocity between individuals and among individuals, groups, and Inca rulers. "Taxes" consisted of a labour obligation of a person to the Empire. The Inca rulers (who theoretically owned all the means of production) reciprocated by granting access to land and goods and providing food and drink in celebratory feasts for their subjects.

Many local forms of worship persisted in the empire, most of them concerning local sacred huacas or wak'a , but the Inca leadership encouraged the sun worship of Inti – their sun god – and imposed its sovereignty above other religious groups, such as that of Pachamama . The Incas considered their king, the Sapa Inca , to be the "son of the Sun".

The Inca economy has been the subject of scholarly debate. Darrell E. La Lone, in his work The Inca as a Nonmarket Economy , noted that scholars have previously described it as "feudal, slave, [or] socialist", as well as "a system based on reciprocity and redistribution; a system with markets and commerce; or an Asiatic mode of production ."


INFOBOX
=======
Realm of the Four Parts
Tawantinsuyu
(
Quechua
)
1438–1533/1572
Sapa Inca
banner
The Inca Empire at its greatest extent,
c.
1525
Capital
Cusco
Official languages
Classical Quechua
; likely
Aymara
before reign of
Huayna Capac
Common languages
Quechuan languages
,
Aymaran languages
,
Puquina language
,
Mochica language
,
Barbacoan
and scores of other smaller languages.
Religion
Inca religion
Government
Divine
,
absolute monarchy
Sapa Inca
• 1438–1471
Pachacuti
• 1471–1493
Topa Inca Yupanqui
• 1493–1525
Huayna Capac
• 1525–1532
Huascar
• 1532–1533
Atahualpa
Historical era
Pre-Columbian era
•
Pachacuti
created the Tawantinsuyu
1438
•
Civil war
between
Huascar
and
Atahualpa
1529–1532
•
Spanish conquest
led by
Francisco Pizarro
1533/1572
• End of the
last Inca resistance
1572
Area
1527
2,000,000 km
(770,000 sq mi)
Population
• Early 16th century
12 million
Preceded by
Succeeded by
Kingdom of Chimor
Kingdom of Cusco
Aymara kingdoms
New Castile
New Toledo
New Andalusia
Neo-Inca State