LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Falklands War ( Spanish : Guerra de las Malvinas ) was a ten-week undeclared war between Argentina and the United Kingdom in 1982 over two British Overseas Territories in the South Atlantic : the Falkland Islands and its territorial dependency , South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands . The conflict began on 2 April 1982, when Argentina invaded and occupied the Falkland Islands , followed by the invasion of South Georgia the next day. On 5 April the British government dispatched a naval task force to engage the Argentine Navy and Air Force before making an amphibious assault on the islands. The conflict lasted 74 days and ended with an Argentine surrender on 14 June, returning the islands to British control. In total, 649 Argentine military personnel, 255 British military personnel, and 3 Falkland Islanders were killed during the hostilities.

The conflict was a major episode in the protracted dispute over the territories' sovereignty . Argentina claimed (and maintains) that the islands are Argentine territory, and the Argentine government thus described its military action as the reclamation of its own territory. The British government, however, regarded the action as an invasion of a territory that had been a Crown colony since 1841. Falkland Islanders, who have inhabited the islands since the early 19th century, are predominantly descendants of British settlers, and strongly favour British sovereignty . Neither state officially declared war , although both governments declared the islands a war zone.

The conflict had a strong effect in both countries and has been the subject of various books, articles, films, and songs . Patriotic sentiment ran high in Argentina, but the unfavourable outcome prompted large protests against the ruling military government , hastening its downfall and the democratisation of the country . In the United Kingdom, the Conservative government, bolstered by the successful outcome, was re-elected with an increased majority the following year . The cultural and political effect of the conflict has been less in the UK than in Argentina, where it has remained a common topic for discussion.

Diplomatic relations between the United Kingdom and Argentina were restored in 1989 following a meeting in Madrid , at which the two governments issued a joint statement. No change in either country's position regarding the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands was made explicit. In 1994 Argentina adopted a new constitution , which declared the Falkland Islands as part of one of its provinces by law. However, the islands continue to operate as a self-governing British Overseas Territory.


INFOBOX
=======
Falklands War
Part of the
Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute
Clockwise from top left:
HMS
Hermes
(right) and
HMS
Broadsword
(left) of the British Task Force; two
Super Étendards
of the Argentinian Navy; Argentinian Army POWs in Stanley; British
HMS
Antelope
after being hit (later sank)
Date
2 April – 14 June 1982
(
1982-04-02
–
1982-06-14
)
(2 months, 1 week and 5 days)
Location
Falkland Islands
,
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Result
British victory
Belligerents
Argentina
United Kingdom
Commanders and leaders
Leopoldo Galtieri
Jorge Anaya
Basilio Lami Dozo
Juan Lombardo
Ernesto Horacio Crespo
Mario Menéndez
(
POW
)
Margaret Thatcher
Terence Lewin
Henry Leach
John Fieldhouse
Sandy Woodward
Jeremy Moore
Michael Clapp
Julian Thompson
Tony Wilson
Strength
Land forces
:
13,000 (peak strength)
Land forces
:
about 5,000–7,500
Casualties and losses
Casualties:
649 killed
1,657 wounded
11,313 captured
Losses:
1
Brooklyn
-class cruiser
1
Balao
-class submarine
4 cargo vessels
2 patrol boats
1
naval trawler
25 helicopters
35 fighters
2 bombers
4 cargo aircraft
25
COIN aircraft
9 armed trainers
Casualties:
255 killed
775 wounded
107 captured
Losses:
2
Type 42 destroyers
2
Type 21 frigates
1
landing ship
1 landing craft
1
container ship
1 light
tank
24 helicopters
10 fighters
3 Falkland Islanders killed by shelling