LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Boxer Rebellion , also known as the Boxer Uprising , Boxer Movement , Yihetuan Movement ( traditional Chinese : 義和團運動 ; simplified Chinese : 义和团运动 ), or Boxer War , was an anti-foreign , anti-imperialist , and anti-Christian uprising in North China between 1899 and 1901, towards the end of the Qing dynasty , by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists . Its members were known as the "Boxers" in English, owing to many of them practicing Chinese martial arts , which at the time were referred to as "Chinese boxing". It was defeated by the Eight-Nation Alliance of foreign powers.

Following the First Sino-Japanese War , villagers in North China feared the expansion of foreign spheres of influence and resented Christian missionaries who ignored local customs and used their power to protect their followers in court. In 1898, North China experienced natural disasters, including the Yellow River flooding and droughts, which Boxers blamed on foreign and Christian influence. Beginning in 1899, the movement spread across Shandong and the North China Plain , destroying foreign property such as railroads, and attacking or murdering Chinese Christians and missionaries. The events came to a head in June 1900, when Boxer fighters, convinced they were invulnerable to foreign weapons, converged on Beijing with the slogan "Support the Qing government and destroy the foreigners".

Diplomats, missionaries, soldiers, and some Chinese Christians took refuge in the Legation Quarter , which the Boxers besieged. The Eight-Nation Alliance—comprising American, Austro-Hungarian, British, French, German, Italian, Japanese, and Russian troops—invaded China to lift the siege and on June 17, stormed the Dagu Fort at Tianjin . Empress Dowager Cixi , who had initially been hesitant, supported the Boxers and on June 21st, issued an imperial decree that was a de facto declaration of war on the invading powers. Chinese officialdom was split between those supporting the Boxers and those favouring conciliation, led by Prince Qing . The supreme commander of the Chinese forces, the Manchu general Ronglu , later claimed he acted to protect the foreigners. Officials in the southern provinces ignored the imperial order to fight against foreigners.

The Eight-Nation Alliance, after initially being turned back by the Imperial Chinese military and Boxer militia, brought 20,000 armed troops to China. They defeated the Imperial Army in Tianjin and arrived in Beijing on 14 August, relieving the 55-day Siege of the International Legations . Plunder and looting of the capital and the surrounding countryside ensued, along with summary execution of those suspected of being Boxers in retribution. The Boxer Protocol of 7 September 1901 provided for the execution of government officials who had supported the Boxers, for foreign troops to be stationed in Beijing, and for 450 million taels of silver—more than the government's annual tax revenue—to be paid as indemnity over the course of the next 39 years to the eight invading nations. The Qing dynasty's handling of the Boxer Rebellion further weakened both their credibility and control over China, and led to the Late Qing reforms , and to a greater extent the Xinhai Revolution .


INFOBOX
=======
Boxer Rebellion
Clockwise:
Alliance
landed at
Taku Forts
Chief Commander
Alfred von Waldersee
inspecting the army
Boxer
Army
Empress Dowager Cixi
fled to
Xi'an
Alliance entering
Forbidden City
after the
Battle of Beijing
Date
17 September 1899 – 7 September 1901
(1 year, 11 months, 1 week, and 3 days)
Location
North China
,
Yellow Sea
Result
Eight-Nation Alliance
victory
Boxer Protocol
signed
Belligerents
Eight-Nation Alliance
United Kingdom
Russia
Japan
France
Germany
United States
Italy
Austria-Hungary
Netherlands
Spain
Belgium
Mutual Defence Pact of Southeast China
(after 1900)
Boxers
Qing dynasty
(
after 1900
)
Commanders and leaders
Legations
Claude MacDonald
Seymour Expedition
Edward Seymour
Gaselee Expedition
Alfred Gaselee
Yevgeni Alekseyev
Nikolai Linevich
Fukushima Yasumasa
Yamaguchi Motomi
Henri-Nicolas Frey
Adna Chaffee
Occupation Force
Alfred von Waldersee
Manchuria occupation
Aleksey Kuropatkin
Paul von Rennenkampf
Pavel Mishchenko
Mutual Defence Pact
Yuan Shikai
Li Hongzhang
Liu Kunyi
Zhang Zhidong
Boxer movement
Cao Futian
Lin Hei'er
(
POW
)
Zhang Decheng
†
Zhao Sanduo
Imperial government
Guangxu Emperor
Empress Dowager Cixi
Yuxian
Commander-in-chief
Ronglu
Hushenying
Zaiyi
Tenacious Army
Nie Shicheng
†
Resolute Army
Ma Yukun
Gansu Army
Dong Fuxiang
Strength
Seymour Expedition
2,100‍–‍2,188
Gaselee Expedition
18,000
China Relief Expedition
2,500
Russian troops
58,000
to 100,000
or 200,000
Boxers
100,000‍–‍300,000
Qing troops
100,000
Casualties and losses
32,000 Chinese Christians and 200 Western missionaries (northern China)
100,000 total deaths