LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Anglo-Zulu War , or simply the Zulu War , was fought in present-day South Africa from January to early July 1879 between forces of the British Empire and the Zulu Kingdom . Two famous battles of the war were the Zulu victory at Isandlwana and the British defence at Rorke's Drift .

Following the passing of the British North America Act 1867 forming a federation in Canada, Lord Carnarvon thought that a similar political effort, coupled with military campaigns, might lead to a ruling white minority over a black majority in South Africa. This would yield a large pool of cheap labour for the British sugar plantations and mines, and was intended to bring the African Kingdoms, tribal areas, and Boer republics into South Africa .

In 1874, Sir Bartle Frere was appointed as British High Commissioner for Southern Africa to effect such plans.  Among the obstacles were the armed independent states of the South African Republic and the Zulu Kingdom .

Frere, on his own initiative, sent a provocative ultimatum on 11 December 1878 to Zulu King Cetshwayo .  Upon its rejection, he ordered Lord Chelmsford to invade Zululand. The war had several particularly bloody battles, including an opening victory for the Zulu at the Battle of Isandlwana , followed by the defence of Rorke's Drift by a small British Garrison from an attack by a large Zulu force. However, the British eventually gained the upper hand at Kambula , before taking the Zulu capital of Ulundi . The British eventually won the war, ending Zulu dominance of the region. The British Empire made the Zulu Kingdom a protectorate and later annexed it in 1887.

The war dispelled prior colonial notions of British invincibility, due to their massive early defeats. Together with famines , diplomatic misadventures , and other unpopular wars overseas (such as the Second Anglo-Afghan War ), it contributed to the ejection of Benjamin Disraeli 's government from office in 1880 , after only one term.


INFOBOX
=======
Anglo-Zulu War
From top left clockwise: The
Battle of Isandlwana
, the charge of the
17th Lancers
at
Ulundi
, the British defence of
Kambula
and the British defence of
Rorke's Drift
Date
11 January – 4 July 1879
(5 months, 3 weeks and 2 days)
Location
Zulu Kingdom
, present day
South Africa
Result
British Victory
Division of Zululand, exiling of
Cetshwayo
to Capetown following his capture at
Ulundi
, and the
uSuthu-Mandlakazi Conflict
Territorial
changes
British forced division of Zululand into Chiefdoms with British appointed leaders
Belligerents
United Kingdom
Colony of Natal
Boer Volunteers
Zulu Kingdom
Commanders and leaders
Benjamin Disraeli
Henry Bartle Frere
Lord Chelmsford
Garnet Wolseley
Richard Thomas Glyn
Evelyn Wood
Anthony Booth
Charles Pearson
John Chard
Gonville Bromhead
Frederick Marshall
Redvers Buller
Anthony Durnford
†
Henry Pulleine
†
David Moriarty
†
Cetshwayo kaMpande
Ntshingwayo Khoza
Dabulamanzi kaMpande
Zibhebhu kaMaphitha
Mbilini waMswati
†
Mnyamana Buthelezi
Somopho kaZikhala
Manyonyoba Kubheka
Godide kaNdlela
Mnyamana kaNgqengelele
Ziwedu kaMpande
Vumindaba kaNthati
Mavumengwana kaNdlela
Msebe kaMadaka
Mkumbikazulu kaSihayo
†
Strength
1st invasion:
16,500–16,800
6,700 British and Colonial troops
9,000 Africans
800 Auxiliaries
17 cannons
7
Gatling guns
2nd invasion:
25,000
16,000 British troops
7,000 Africans
14 cannons
3 Gatling guns
35,000
–50,000
Impis
Casualties and losses
1,902 killed
268 wounded
6,930 killed
3,500+ wounded
2 captured