LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Battle of Britain ( German : Luftschlacht um England , lit. ' air battle for England ' ) was a military campaign of the Second World War , in which the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the Fleet Air Arm (FAA) of the Royal Navy defended the United Kingdom against large-scale attacks by Nazi Germany 's air force, the Luftwaffe . It was the first major military campaign fought entirely by air forces. It takes its name from the speech given by Prime Minister Winston Churchill to the House of Commons on 18 June, 1940: "What General Weygand called the 'Battle of France' is over. I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin."

The Germans had rapidly overwhelmed France and the Low Countries in the Battle of France , leaving Britain to face the threat of invasion by sea. The German high command recognised the difficulties of a seaborne attack while the Royal Navy controlled the English Channel and the North Sea . The primary objective of the German forces was to compel Britain to agree to a negotiated peace settlement .

The British officially recognise the battle's duration as being from 10 July until 31 October 1940, which overlaps the period of large-scale night attacks known as the Blitz , that lasted from 7 September 1940 to 11 May 1941. German historians do not follow this subdivision and regard the battle as a single campaign lasting from July 1940 to May 1941, including the Blitz.

In July 1940, the air and sea blockade began, with the Luftwaffe mainly targeting coastal-shipping convoys, as well as ports and shipping centres such as Portsmouth . On 16 July, Hitler ordered the preparation of Operation Sea Lion as a potential amphibious and airborne assault on Britain, to follow once the Luftwaffe had air superiority over the Channel. On 1 August, the Luftwaffe was directed to achieve air superiority over the RAF, with the aim of incapacitating RAF Fighter Command ; 12 days later , it shifted the attacks to RAF airfields and infrastructure . As the battle progressed, the Luftwaffe also targeted factories involved in aircraft production and strategic infrastructure. Eventually, it employed terror bombing on areas of political significance and on civilians. In September, RAF Bomber Command night raids disrupted the German preparation of converted barges, and the Luftwaffe's failure to overwhelm the RAF forced Hitler to postpone and eventually cancel Operation Sea Lion. The Luftwaffe proved unable to sustain daylight raids, but their continued night-bombing operations on Britain became known as the Blitz.

Germany's failure to destroy Britain's air defences and force it out of the conflict was the first major German defeat in the Second World War.


INFOBOX
=======
Battle of Britain
Part of the
Western Front
of
World War II
From top to bottom, left to right:
British
Spitfire
intercepts a German bomber
German
Heinkel He111s
over the
Isle of Dogs
, London
Formation of German
Heinkel He 111s
Royal Air Force station under attack
Chain Home
radar station on the south coast
RAF pilots scramble to their aircraft during the battle
Date
10 July – 31 October 1940
(3 months and 3 weeks)
Location
British
airspace
,
English Channel
Result
British victory
Belligerents
United Kingdom
Canada
Germany
Italy
Commanders and leaders
Hugh Dowding
Keith Park
Trafford Leigh-Mallory
Quintin Brand
Richard Saul
Hermann Göring
Albert Kesselring
Hugo Sperrle
Hans-Jürgen Stumpff
Rino Fougier
Units involved
Royal Air Force
Royal Navy
Fleet Air Arm
Royal Canadian Air Force
Luftwaffe
Corpo Aereo Italiano
Strength
1,963 aircraft
2,550 aircraft
Casualties and losses
1,542 killed
422 wounded
1,744 aircraft destroyed
2,585 killed
735 wounded
925 captured
1,977 aircraft destroyed
23,002 civilians killed
32,138 civilians wounded