LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Punic Wars were a series of wars fought between the Roman Republic and the Carthaginian Empire during the period 264 to 146 BC. Three such wars took place, involving a total of forty-three years of warfare on both land and sea across the western Mediterranean region, and a four-year-long revolt against Carthage .

The First Punic War broke out on the Mediterranean island of Sicily in 264 BC as a result of Rome's expansionary policy coming into conflict with Carthage's proprietary approach to the island. At the start of the war Carthage was the dominant power in the western Mediterranean, with an extensive maritime empire , while Rome was a rapidly expanding power in Italy , with a strong army but no navy. The fighting took place primarily on Sicily and its surrounding waters, as well as in North Africa , Corsica and Sardinia . It lasted twenty-three years, until 241 BC, when the Carthaginians were defeated. By the terms of the peace treaty Carthage paid large reparations and Sicily was annexed as the first Roman province . The end of the war sparked a major but eventually unsuccessful revolt within Carthaginian territory known as the Mercenary War .

The Second Punic War began in 218 BC and witnessed the Carthaginian general Hannibal 's crossing of the Alps and invasion of mainland Italy. This expedition enjoyed considerable early success and campaigned in Italy for fourteen years before the survivors withdrew. There was also extensive fighting in Iberia (modern Spain and Portugal), Sicily, Sardinia and North Africa. The successful Roman invasion of the Carthaginian homeland in Africa in 204 BC led to Hannibal's recall. He was defeated in the battle of Zama in 202 BC and Carthage sued for peace . A treaty was agreed in 201 BC which stripped Carthage of its overseas territories and some of its African ones, imposed a large indemnity, severely restricted the size of its armed forces and prohibited Carthage from waging war without Rome's express permission. This caused Carthage to cease to be a military threat to Rome.

In 151 BC Carthage attempted to defend itself against Numidian encroachments; Rome used this as a justification to declare war in 149 BC, starting the Third Punic War . This conflict was fought entirely on Carthaginian territory in what is now Tunisia and centred on the siege of Carthage . In 146 BC the Romans stormed the city of Carthage , sacked it, slaughtered or enslaved its population and completely demolished the city. The Carthaginian territories were taken over as the Roman province of Africa . The ruins of the city lie east of modern Tunis on the North African coast.


INFOBOX
=======
Punic Wars
Territory controlled by Rome and Carthage at different times during the Punic Wars
Carthaginian possessions
Roman possessions
Date
264–146 BC
Location
Western Mediterranean region
Result
Roman victory
Territorial
changes
Roman conquest of all
Carthaginian
territories (except
Numidia
)
Belligerents
Rome
Carthage