LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Northwest Passage ( NWP ) is the sea lane between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans through the Arctic Ocean , near the northern coast of North America via waterways through the Arctic Archipelago of Canada. The eastern route along the Arctic coasts of Norway and Siberia is accordingly called the Northeast Passage (NEP).
The various islands of the archipelago are separated from one another and from mainland Canada by a series of Arctic waterways collectively known as the Northwest Passages , Northwestern Passages or the Canadian Internal Waters . In British English it is often spelled North-west Passage .

For centuries, European explorers, beginning with Christopher Columbus in 1492, sought a navigable passage as a possible trade route to Asia, but were blocked by North, Central, and South America; by ice, or by rough waters (e.g. Tierra del Fuego ). An ice-bound northern route was discovered in 1850 by the Irish explorer Robert McClure , whose expedition completed the passage by hauling sledges. Scotsman John Rae explored a more southerly area in 1854 through which Norwegian Roald Amundsen made the first complete passage entirely by ship in 1903–1906. Until 2009, the Arctic pack ice prevented regular marine shipping throughout most of the year. Arctic sea ice decline , linked primarily to climate change , has rendered the waterways more navigable for ice navigation .

The contested sovereignty claims over the waters may complicate future shipping through the region: the Canadian government maintains that the Northwestern Passages are part of Canadian Internal Waters, but the United States claims that they are an international strait and transit passage, allowing free and unencumbered passage. If, as the head of a Canadian mining company claims, parts of the eastern end of the Passage are barely 15 metres (49 ft) deep, the route's viability as a Euro-Asian shipping route is reduced. In 2016, Chinese shipping line COSCO expressed a desire to make regular voyages of cargo ships using the passage to the eastern United States and Europe, after a successful passage by Nordic Orion of 73,500 tonnes deadweight tonnage in September 2013. Fully laden, Nordic Orion sat too deep in the water to sail through the Panama Canal .


INFOBOX
=======
Discovery of Northern Passage Act 1776
Act of Parliament
Parliament of Great Britain
Long title
An Act for giving a publick Reward unto such Person or Persons, being His Majesty's Subject or Subjects, as shall discover a Northern Passage for Vessels by Sea, between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans; and also unto such as shall first approach, by Sea, within One Degree of the Northern Pole.
Citation
16 Geo. 3
. c. 6
Territorial extent
Great Britain
Dates
Royal assent
22 December 1775
Commencement
26 October 1775
Repealed
8 May 1818
Other legislation
Repealed by
Discovery of Longitude at Sea, etc. Act 1818
Relates to
Discovery of North-West Passage Act 1744
Status: Repealed
Text of statute as originally enacted