LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Atlantic slave trade or transatlantic slave trade involved the transportation by slave traders of enslaved African people to the Americas . This trade was operated by slave ships from both Europe and the New World . Some of these voyages used the triangular trade route and its Middle Passage , particularly in the early phases. Europeans established a coastal slave trade in the 15th century, and trade to the Americas began in the 16th century, lasting through the 19th century. The vast majority of those who were transported in the transatlantic slave trade were from Central Africa and West Africa . In contrast to other slave trades, those taking slaves from Africa generally bought their cargo from West and Central African slave merchants. This applied to both Europeans in the transatlantic trade and to Arab slave traders supplying their own markets. Whilst Europeans did get involved in some raiding, this was much less common and was usually discouraged. In general, the Portuguese built barracoons in their African slaving bases, in which to gather newly purchased captives ready for the next ship to arrive. Though the Dutch established some forts as African bases (some of which were captured by the British) for similar purposes, the usual approach by North European slave traders was to use their ship as a base in which to gather their cargo. This meant that these ships spent much longer on the African coast than Portuguese vessels, and the first slaves to be bought had to endure much longer confined to the ship.

The New World (or the Americas) had, after Australia, a much lower population density than the other inhabited continents. Any exploitation by the new discoverers of these lands needed a workforce, but the sparse indigenous population was reducing due to European diseases, to which they had no resistance. The demand for labour could not be met by Europeans, who were particularly reluctant to emigrate at this early stage. The solution was the same as that used for the sugar plantations of Madeira and the Canary Islands c. 1450 : slaves bought from Africa. Slaves were sold in the Americas to work on coffee, tobacco, cocoa, sugar, and cotton plantations , gold and silver mines, rice fields, the construction industry, cutting timber for ships, as skilled labour, and as domestic servants. The first enslaved Africans sent to the English colonies were classified as indentured servants , with legal standing similar to that of contract-based workers coming from Britain and Ireland. By the middle of the 17th century, slavery had hardened as a racial caste, with African slaves and their future offspring being legally the property of their owners, as children born to slave mothers were also slaves ( partus sequitur ventrem ). As property, the people were considered merchandise or units of labour, and were sold at markets with other goods and services.

The major Atlantic slave trading nations, in order of trade volume, were Portugal , Britain , Spain , France , the Netherlands , the United States , and Denmark . Several had established outposts on the African coast, where they purchased slaves from local African leaders. The current estimate is that about 12.75 million Africans were loaded onto slave ships in Africa for transportation to the Americas. Of these, up to 2 million died during the voyage. Many others died as a result of slave raids, wars, and during transport to the coast for sale to European slave traders. Near the beginning of the 19th century, various governments acted to ban the trade, although illegal smuggling still occurred. It was generally thought that the transatlantic slave trade ended in 1867, but evidence was later found of voyages until 1873. In the early 21st century, several governments issued apologies for the transatlantic slave trade.


INFOBOX
=======
[NO INFOBOX FOUND]