LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Spanish Civil War ( Spanish : La guerra civil española ) was fought from 1936 to 1939 between the Republicans and the Nationalist rebels. Republicans loyal to the left -leaning Popular Front government of the Second Spanish Republic included socialists , anarchists , communists , and separatists , supported by the Soviet Union . The opposing Nationalists were an alliance of fascist Falangists , monarchists , conservatives , and traditionalists , supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . Initially led by a military junta , until General Francisco Franco was appointed supreme leader on 1 October 1936 of what he called the Spanish State . Due to the international political climate at the time, the war was variously viewed as class struggle , religious struggle , or struggle between republican democracy and dictatorship , revolution and counterrevolution , or between fascism and communism. The Nationalists won the war in early 1939, and ruled Spain until Franco's death in November 1975.

The war began after the partial failure of the coup d'état of July 1936 against the Popular Front government by a group of generals of the Spanish Republican Armed Forces . The Nationalist faction consisted of right-wing groups, including the Christian traditionalist party CEDA , monarchists, including both the opposing Alfonsists and the religious conservative Carlists , and the Falange Española de las JONS , a fascist political party. However, rebelling units in almost all important cities did not gain control, leaving Spain militarily and politically divided. The rebellion was countered by arming left-wing social movements and parties, and formation of militias which led to rapid socioeconomic and political transformation in the Republican zone , referred to as the Spanish Revolution . The Nationalist forces received munitions, soldiers, and air support from Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, while the Republican government received support from the Soviet Union and Mexico . Other countries, such as the United Kingdom, France , and the United States, continued to recognise the Republican government, but followed official policies of non-intervention . Despite this, tens of thousands of citizens from non-interventionist countries directly participated in the conflict, mostly in the pro-Republican International Brigades .

Franco gradually emerged as the primary leader of the Nationalist side, becoming the dictator of the Spanish State by 1937 and co-opting Falangism. The Nationalists advanced from their strongholds in the south and west, capturing most of Spain's northern coastline in 1937 and besieging Madrid. After much of Catalonia was captured in 1938 and 1939, and Madrid was cut off from Barcelona, the Republican military position became hopeless. On 5 March 1939, in response to allegedly increasing communist dominance of the Republican government and the deteriorating military situation, Colonel Segismundo Casado led a military coup against the Republican government , intending to seek peace with the Nationalists. These peace overtures, however, were rejected by Franco. Following internal conflict between Republican factions in Madrid in the same month, Franco entered the capital and declared victory on 1 April 1939. Hundreds of thousands of those associated with the Republicans fled Spain, mostly to refugee camps in southern France ; many of those who stayed were persecuted by the victorious Nationalists.

The war became notable for the passion and political division it inspired worldwide, and for the many atrocities that occurred. Organised purges occurred in territory captured by Franco's forces to consolidate power. Mass executions took place in areas controlled by the Republicans, with the participation of local authorities varying by location.


INFOBOX
=======
Spanish Civil War
Part of the
interwar period
and
prelude to World War II
Clockwise from top-left:
Members of the
XI International Brigade
on a
T-26
at the
Battle of Belchite
Granollers
after being
bombed
by the Aviazione Legionaria in 1938
Bombing of an airfield in
Spanish Morocco
Republican soldiers at the
Battle of Teruel
Nationalist soldiers operating an
anti-aircraft gun
The
Lincoln Battalion
Date
17 July 1936 – 1 April 1939
Location
Spain
Morocco
Western Sahara
Guinea
Result
Nationalist
victory
Territorial
changes
Establishment of the
Spanish State
under the rule of
Francisco Franco
and end of the
Second Spanish Republic
Belligerents
Republicans
Spanish Republic
People's Army
Popular Front
UGT
CNT
-
FAI
POUM
Generalitat de Catalunya
/
Revolutionary Catalonia
People's Army of Catalonia
Estat Català
Regional Defence Council of Aragon
Popular Executive Committee of Valencia
Sovereign Council of Asturias and León
Málaga Public Health Committee
Euzko Gudarostea
Madrid Defense Council
Foreign volunteers
International Brigades
Soviet Union
Mexico
Nationalists
Spanish State
National Army
Spanish Military Union
FET y de las JONS
FE de las JONS
Requetés
/
CT
Army of Africa
CEDA
Spanish Renovation
Foreign volunteers
Viriatos
Irish Brigade
Joan of Arc Battalion
White émigrés
Iron Guards
Italy
Germany
Commanders and leaders
Manuel Azaña
Francisco Largo Caballero
Juan Negrín
Indalecio Prieto
Segismundo Casado
Vicente Rojo Lluch
Toribio Martínez Cabrera
José Miaja
Juan Modesto
Juan Hernández Saravia
Dolores Ibárruri
Buenaventura Durruti
†
Joaquín Ascaso
Lluís Companys
José Antonio Aguirre
Francisco Franco
Emilio Mola
†
José Sanjurjo
†
Gonzalo Queipo de Llano
Juan Yagüe
Miguel Cabanellas
#
José Enrique Varela
Fidel Dávila Arrondo
Francisco Gómez-Jordana
José Antonio Primo de Rivera
Manuel Hedilla
Manuel Fal Conde
Manuel Goded Llopis
Mohammed ben Mizzian
Strength
1936 strength:
446,800 combatants
31 ships
12 submarines
13,000 sailors
1938 strength:
450,000 infantry
350 aircraft
200 tanks
59,380 international volunteers
3,015 Soviet technicians
772 Soviet pilots
1936 strength:
58,000 soldiers
68,500 gendarmes
1,500 cavalry and self defense groups
350 Mercenaries
16 operational ships
7,000 sailors
1938 strength:
600,000 infantry
600 aircraft
290 tanks
1,500 PMC Contractors
70,000–75,000
Italian troops
16,000
German troops
8,000–20,000
Portuguese volunteers
Casualties and losses
110,000 killed in action (including executions)
50,000–200,000 civilians killed inside the Nationalist zone
90,000 killed in action (including executions)
38,000–110,965 civilians killed inside the Republican zone
Estimates differ widely