LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The Greek War of Independence , also known as the Greek Revolution or the Greek Revolution of 1821 , was a successful war of independence fought by Greek revolutionaries against the Ottoman Empire from 1821 to 1829. In 1826, the Greeks were assisted by the British Empire , the Kingdom of France , and the Russian Empire , while the Ottomans were aided by their vassals, especially by the Eyalet of Egypt . The war led to the formation of modern Greece , which in subsequent years would be expanded to its current size. The revolution is commemorated by the Greek diaspora as independence day on 25 March.

All Greek territory, except the Ionian Islands , came under Ottoman rule in the 15th century, in the decades surrounding the Fall of Constantinople . During the following centuries, there were sporadic but unsuccessful Greek uprisings against Ottoman rule. In 1814, a secret organization called the Filiki Eteria (Society of Friends) was founded with the aim of liberating Greece. It planned to launch revolts in the Peloponnese , the Danubian Principalities , and Constantinople . The insurrection was planned for 25 March 1821, the Orthodox Christian Feast of the Annunciation . However, the plans were discovered by the Ottoman authorities, forcing it to start earlier.

The first revolt began on 21 February 1821 in the Danubian Principalities , but it was soon put down by the Ottomans. These events urged Greeks in the Peloponnese into action and on 17 March 1821, the Maniots were first to declare war. In September 1821, the Greeks, under the leadership of Theodoros Kolokotronis , captured Tripolitsa . Revolts in Crete , Macedonia , and Central Greece broke out, but were suppressed. Greek fleets achieved success against the Ottoman navy in the Aegean Sea and prevented Ottoman reinforcements from arriving by sea. Tensions developed among Greek factions, leading to two consecutive civil wars . The Ottoman Sultan called in Muhammad Ali of Egypt , who agreed to send his son, Ibrahim Pasha , to Greece with an army to suppress the revolt in return for territorial gains. Ibrahim landed in the Peloponnese in February 1825 and brought most of the peninsula under Egyptian control by the end of that year. Though an Ottoman–Egyptian invasion of Mani failed, Athens fell, and revolutionary morale decreased.

The three great powers —Russia, Britain, and France—decided to intervene, sending their naval squadrons to Greece in 1827. They destroyed the Ottoman–Egyptian fleet at the Battle of Navarino , and turned the tide in favor of the revolutionaries. In 1828, the Egyptian army withdrew under pressure from a French expeditionary force . The Ottoman garrisons in the Peloponnese surrendered and the Greek revolutionaries retook central Greece. The Ottoman Empire declared war on Russia allowing for the Russian army to move into the Balkans. This forced the Ottomans to accept Greek autonomy in the Treaty of Adrianople and semi-autonomy for Serbia and the Romanian principalities. After nine years of war, Greece was recognized as an independent state under the London Protocol of February 1830. Further negotiations in 1832 led to the London Conference and the Treaty of Constantinople , which defined the final borders of the new state and established Prince Otto of Bavaria as the first king of Greece .

The slogan of the revolution, Eleftheria i thanatos ' Freedom or death ' , became Greece's national motto.


INFOBOX
=======
Greek War of Independence
Part of the
revolutions during the 1820s
Top left: The camp  at
Phaliro
. Top right: The
burning of the Ottoman flagship off Chios
. Bottom right: The
Battle of Navarino
. Bottom left:
Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt
at the
Third Siege of Missolonghi
.
Date
21 February 1821
–
12 September 1829
(8 years, 6 months and 3 weeks)
Location
Ottoman Greece
(present-day
Greece
)
Result
Greek victory
Territorial
changes
Independence of
Greece
The
Peloponnese
,
Saronic Islands
,
Cyclades
,
Sporades
and
Continental Greece
ceded to the independent Greek state
Crete
ceded to
Egypt
Belligerents
Greek Revolutionaries
In detail:
Klephts
Armatoloi
Filiki Eteria
Sacred Band
Messenian Senate
Peloponnesian Senate
Senate of Western Continental Greece
Areopagus of Eastern Continental Greece
Temporary regime of Crete
Military-Political System of Samos
After 1822:
First Hellenic Republic
Military support:
Philhellenes
Carbonari
revolutionaries
Serbian
revolutionaries
Moldavian
revolutionaries
Russian Empire
Kingdom of France
United Kingdom
Diplomatic support:
Haiti
United States
Ottoman Empire
Supported by:
Egypt
Regency of Algiers
Tripolitania
Tunis
Danubian Sich
Commanders and leaders
Alexander Ypsilantis
#
Demetrios Ypsilantis
Ioannis Kapodistrias
Theodoros Kolokotronis
Alexandros Mavrokordatos
Andreas Zaimis
Germanos III
#
Petros Mavromichalis
Georgios Karaiskakis
†
Athanasios Diakos
Grigorios Papaflessas
†
Andreas Metaxas
Markos Botsaris
†
Yannis Makriyannis
Nikitas Stamatelopoulos
Emmanouel Pappas
#
Anastasios Karatasos
Odysseas Androutsos
Andreas Miaoulis
Konstantinos Kanaris
Laskarina Bouboulina
†
Manto Mavrogenous
Philhellenes
:
Lord Byron
#
Charles Nicolas Fabvier
Richard Church
European support
:
Nicholas I
Lodewijk Heiden
Henri de Rigny
Nicolas Maison
Edward Codrington
Mahmud II
Nasuhzade Ali Pasha
†
Omer Vrioni
Mahmud Dramali Pasha
#
Kara Mehmed
Hursid Pasha
†
Koca Hüsrev Mehmed Pasha
Mustafa Pasha Bushatli
Reşid Mehmed Pasha
Mehmed Selim Pasha
Egyptian support
:
Muhammad Ali Pasha
Ibrahim Pasha
Ismael Gibraltar
†
Algerian support
:
Hussein Dey
Casualties and losses
240,000+ total casualties
^
Only in 1821
^
From 1821–1823.
^
From 1821.
^
From 1826.
^
Haiti was the first nation to recognize the independence of Greece.