LEAD PARAGRAPHS
================
The partition of India in 1947 was the division of British India into two independent dominion states, the Union of India and Dominion of Pakistan . The Union of India is today the Republic of India , and the Dominion of Pakistan is the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the People's Republic of Bangladesh . The partition involved the division of two provinces, Bengal and the Punjab , based on district-wide non-Muslim (mostly Hindu and Sikh ) or Muslim majorities. It also involved the division of the British Indian Army , the Royal Indian Navy , the Indian Civil Service , the railways , and the central treasury, between the two new dominions. The partition was set forth in the Indian Independence Act 1947 and resulted in the end of the British Raj , or Crown rule in India. The two self-governing countries of India and Pakistan legally came into existence at midnight on 14–15 August 1947.

With the partition of British India and withdrawal of the British from the Indian subcontinent, the Indian Independence Act  provided that the princely states were released from their subsidiary alliances and other obligations to the British, while the British withdrew from their obligations to the states, leaving the rulers to decide whether to accede to India or Pakistan or to remain independent outside both. Sardar Patel said in a speech in January 1948, "On the lapse of Paramountcy, every Indian State became a separate independent entity." The political integration of the princely states into the two new dominions was begun by many accessions in August 1947, but mostly it followed on later. Critically, the rulers of the states of Hyderabad , Jammu and Kashmir , and others, chose independence.

The partition displaced between 12 and 20 million people along religious lines, creating overwhelming refugee crises associated with the mass migration and population transfer that occurred across the newly constituted dominions; there was large-scale violence, with disputed estimates of the loss of life before, at the time of, or following the partition. As of 2009, the estimates still varied between two hundred thousand and two million. The violent nature of the partition created an atmosphere of hostility and suspicion between India and Pakistan that plagues Indo-Pakistani relations to the present.

The term partition of India does not cover the earlier separations of Burma (now Myanmar ) and Ceylon (now Sri Lanka ) from the administration of British India. It does not cover the incorporation of the enclaves of French India into India during the period 1947–1954, or the annexation of Goa and other districts of Portuguese India by India in 1961. Other contemporaneous political entities in the region in 1947, such as Sikkim , Bhutan , Nepal , and the Maldives , were unaffected by the partition.

The secession of Bangladesh from Pakistan in 1971 was a later partition of Pakistan, and not of India.


INFOBOX
=======
Partition of India
The prevailing religions of the British Indian Empire based on the Census of India, 1901
Date
August 1947
Location
British India
Outcome
Partition
of
British Indian Empire
into independent dominions the
Union of India
and the
Dominion of Pakistan
and
refugee crises
Deaths
200,000–2 million
Displaced
12–20 million displaced